# SpringMassML

Estimated the damping and forcing function parameters of a damped spring-mass system using supervised neural networks. Neural networks include Deep Neural Network and Long Short-Term Network (LSTM). Submitted to the AIAA Young Professionals, Students, and Educators (YPSE) 2024 Conference on November 22. 
## Abstract 
Damped spring-mass systems describe the motion of car suspension systems, the capacitor 
charge for RLC circuits (resistors, inductors, capacitors), and pendulums with damping. The 
damped harmonic behavior over time can be modeled using second-order differential equations.
The forced vibration of these systems describes structural resonance that can be used to study 
suspension bridges in windy conditions and buildings during earthquakes. The damped spring 
mass system excited by a forcing function can be extended to complex structural vibration 
analysis using finite element methods.
This research estimates the damping and forcing function parameters from the position time 
history of a forced damped spring-mass system using supervised neural networks. This problem
assumes that the mass and stiffness are known. The example application is using the vertical 
motion of the automobile on older struts (combined spring-damper) during a test drive to 
estimate the current strut damping and the road forcing function based on an uneven road 
surface.
The training data set included the position time history generated by a fourth order Runga Kutta 
integration assuming a 1.0 kg mass, a 1 N/m spring constant, and each unique damping/forcing 
function combination. The forcing function was defined as a bias disturbance and two sinusoidal
forcing functions at a given angular frequency and at twice that frequency. The damping ratio 
ranged from 0.02 to 10, with the disturbance bias ranging from -1.0 to 1.0, the angular 
frequency of the first sinusoidal function ranging from 0.075 to 0.5 radians/sec, and independent
phase angles for both sinusoidal functions ranging from -p/2 to p/2.
80,000 sets of position time histories corresponding to a damping/forcing function vector of 
seven unique parameters were used to train each neural network model. Afterwards, the trained
networks estimated the damping and forcing function parameters for 20,000 position time 
histories, including under-damped, critically-damped and over-damped systems with various 
bias disturbances and sinusoidal excitation. The Convolutional, Deep, Long Short-Term Memory
(LSTM) and LSTM/Deep neural networks were optimized by choosing the number of layers, 
number of nodes for each layer, and learning rate hyperparameter values to minimize the 2-
norm and infinity norm for the parameter estimation error vector. The Deep neural network was 
the best model to estimate damping, while the LSTM neural network had the least error for the 
forcing function parameters.
The Deep Damping neural network model included 1 Gaussian noise layer, 4 dense layers with 
a rectified linear unit (ReLU) activation function and 1 output dense layer with a linear activation 
function. The LSTM Forcing Function neural network included 1 Gaussian noise layer, 3 LSTM 
layers with hyperbolic tangent activation functions, 3 dense layers with a ReLU activation 
function and 1 output dense layer with a linear activation function. The Deep Damping and 
LSTM Forcing Function networks were trained over 2000 epochs (4.9 hours using an Apple M1 
processor) and 250 epochs (~96 hours using an Apple M1 processor) respectively. The resulting
damping estimate has a mean squared error (MSE) of 6.0%, while the forcing function 
parameter estimate vector has a MSE of 0.003
## All Files in Project
[All File Summary](https://zagar.us/tristan_summer/)
